- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor
of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we're going to talk
all about hearing and balance
and how you can use your
ability to hear specific things
and your balance system in
order to learn anything faster.
The auditory system,
meaning the hearing system,
and your balance system, which is called
the vestibular system, interact
with all the other systems
of the brain and body and, used properly,
can allow you to learn
information more quickly,
remember that information
longer and with more ease
and you can also improve
the way you can hear.
You can improve your balance.
We're going to talk about
tools for all of that.
This is one area of science,
where we understand a lot about the cells
and the mechanisms in the ear
and in the brain and so forth.
So we're going to talk
about that a little bit,
and then we're going to get
directly into protocols,
meaning tools.
We're also going to talk about ways
in which the auditory and
balance system suffer.
We're going to talk about tinnitus,
which is this ringing of the ears that,
unfortunately, for people
that suffer from it,
they really suffer.
It's very intrusive for them.
We're going to talk about some treatments
that can work in some circumstances
and some of the more
recent emerging treatments
that I think many people aren't aware of.
We're also going to talk about this,
what seems like kind of a weird fact,
which is that 70% of people, all people,
make what are called
otoacoustic emissions,
their ears actually make noises.
Chances are your ears are
making noises right now,
but you can't perceive them.
And yet those can have an
influence on other people
and animals in your environment.
It's a fascinating aspect of your biology.
You're going to learn a
lot about how your biology
and brain and ears and
the so-called inner ear
that's associated with balance,
you're going to learn a lot
about how all those work,
you're going to learn
a lot of neuroscience.
I'll even tell you what
type of music to listen to.
And if you listen to me,
you can leverage that
in order to learn faster.
Before we begin talking about the science
of hearing and balance and tools
that leverage hearing and
balance for learning faster,
I want to provide some information
about another way to learn much faster.
There's a paper that
was published recently.
This is a paper that was published
in Cell Reports, an excellent journal.
It's a peer-reviewed paper
from a really excellent group,
looking at skill-learning.
Now, previously, I've talked about how,
in the attempt to learn
skills, the vital thing to do
is to get lots of repetitions.
You've heard of the 10,000 hours thing,
you've heard of lots
of different strategies
for learning faster,
80/20 rule and all that;
the bottom line is you need to generate
many, many repetitions of something
that you're trying to learn.
And the errors that you generate
are also very important for learning.
It also turns out that taking rest
within the learning
episode is very important.
I want to be really clear
what I'm referring to here.
In earlier episodes, I've
discussed how when you're trying
to learn something it's beneficial,
it's been shown in scientific studies,
that if you take a 20-minute shallow nap
or you simply do nothing
after a period of learning,
that it enhances the rates of learning
and the depth of learning,
your ability to learn
and remember that information.
What I'm about to describe are new data
that say that you actually
should be injecting rest
within the learning episode.
Now I'm not talking about
going to sleep while learning.
This is the way that the study was done:
the study involved, having
people learn sequences
of numbers or keys on a piano.
So let's use the keys on a piano example.
I'm not a musician, but I
think I'll get this correct.
They asked people to
practice a sequence of keys,
G-D-F-E-G; G-D-F-E-G; G-D-F-E-G.
And they would practice
that either continually
for a given amount of time,
or they would just do that
for 10 seconds, they would play G-D-F-E-G,
G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G,
G-D-F-E-G for 10 seconds.
And then they would take
a 10-second pause or rest.
They would just space take
a space or a period of time
where they do nothing for 10 seconds
then they would go back
to G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G.
So the two conditions, essentially,
were to have people practice continually,
lots of repetitions,
or to inject or insert
these periods of 10 seconds idle time
where they're not doing anything,
they're not looking at their phone,
they're not focusing on anything,
they're just letting their mind drift
wherever it wants to go
and they are not touching
the keys on the keyboard.
What they found was that
the rates of learning,
the skill acquisition and
the retention of the skill
was significantly faster
when they injected
these short periods of rest,
these 10-second rest periods.
And the rates of learning were,
when I say significantly faster,
were much, much faster.
I'll reveal what that
was in just a moment,
but you might ask why would this work?
Why would it be that injecting
these 10-second rest periods
would enhance rates of learning?
What they called them
was micro-offline gains
because they're taking their brain offline
from the learning task for a moment.
Well, turns out the brain
isn't going offline at all.
You've probably heard of the hippocampus,
the area of the brain involved
in memory and the neocortex,
the area of the brain that's involved
in processing sensory information.
Well, it turns out that during
these brief periods of rest,
these 10-second rest periods,
the hippocampus and the
cortex are active in ways
such that you get a 20 times
repeat of the G-D-F-E-G.
It's a temporal compression, as they say.
So basically, the rehearsal
continues while you rest,
but at 20 times the speed.
So if you were normally getting just,
let's just say five repetitions
of G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G,
G-D-F-E-G per 10 seconds.
Now you multiply that times 20.
In the rest periods, you've
practiced it 100 times.
Your brain has practiced it.
We know this because they
were doing brain imaging,
functional imaging of these people
with brain scanners while
they were doing this.
This is an absolutely staggering effect
and it's one that, believe it or not,
has been hypothesized or thought to exist
for a very long time.
This effect is called the spacing effect.
And it was actually first
proposed by Ebbington in 1885.
And since then, it's been demonstrated
for a huge number of different,
what they call domains,
in the cognitive domain.
So for learning languages,
in the physical domain,
so for learning skills that
involve a motor sequence.
It's been demonstrated for a huge number
of different categories of learning.
If you want to learn all
about the spacing effect
and the categories of
learning that it can impact,
there's a wonderful review article.
I'll provide a link to it.
The title of the review
article is parallels
between spacing effects during behavioral
and cellular learning.
What that review really does
is it ties the behavioral learning
and the improvement of skill
to the underlying changes
in neurons that can explain that learning.
I should mention that the
paper that I'm referring to,
the more recent paper that injects
these 10-second little
micro-offline gains,
rest periods is the work of the
laboratory of Leonard Cohen,
not the musician, Leonard Cohen.
He passed away, he was
not a neuroscientist;
a wonderful poet and musician,
but not a neuroscientist.
Again, the paper was
published in Cell Reports
and we will provide a link
to the full paper as well.
So the takeaway is if you're
trying to learn something,
you need to get those reps in,
but one way that you can get 20 times,
the number of reps in is by injecting
these little 10-second
periods of doing nothing.
Again, during those rest periods,
you really don't want to
attend to anything else,
as much as possible.
You could close your eyes if you want,
or you can just simply wait
and then get right back
into generating repetitions.
I find these papers that Cell
Reports and other journals
have been publishing
recently to be fascinating
because they're really
helping us understand
what are the best protocols
for learning anything.
And they really leverage
the fact that the brain
is willing to generate repetitions for us,
provided that we give it
the rest that it needs.
So inject rest throughout
the learning period.
And if you can, based
on the scientific data,
you would also want to
take a 20-minute nap
or a 20-minute decompress period
where you're not doing anything
after a period of learning.
I think those could both synergize
in order to enhance learning even further,
although that hasn't been looked at yet.
Before we begin talking
about hearing and balance,
I just want to mention that this podcast
is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part
of my desire and effort
to bring zero-cost to consumer information
about science and science related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I want to thank the sponsors
of today's podcast and make it clear
that we only work with sponsors
whose products we absolutely love,
and that we think you
will benefit from as well.
Our first sponsor is Roka.
Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses,
that, in my opinion are the
very highest quality available.
The company was founded by
two all-American swimmers
from Stanford and everything
about their eyeglasses
and sunglasses were created
with performance in mind.
These eyeglasses and sunglasses
have a number of features
that really make them unique.
First of all, they're
extremely lightweight,
the optical clarity of
the lenses is spectacular.
And for the sunglasses, they
have this really great feature,
which is as you move
in and out of shadows,
or across the day, the amount
of sunshine might change,
you always experience the
world as clear and bright,
and that can only come
from really understanding
how the visual system works.
The visual system has all these mechanisms
for adaptation and habituation.
You don't need to know
how those things work,
but the folks at Roka clearly do
because you put these glasses on
and you don't even notice that they're on.
They also stay on your face
even if you get sweaty.
They were designed to
be used while active,
so running and biking,
et cetera or indoors.
One thing that I really like
about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses
is that the aesthetic is terrific.
Even though they were
designed for performance,
unlike a lot of sunglasses out there
that were designed for performance
that look kind of ridiculous,
kind of space-age,
Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses,
you could wear anywhere.
The aesthetic is really clean
and they have a huge
number of different styles
to select from.
If you'd like to try Roca eyeglasses,
you can go to Roka, that's R-O-K-A, .com
and enter the code
Huberman to save 20% off
your first order.
That's Roka, R-O-K-A, .com
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in
getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that
many of the factors that impact
our immediate and long-term
health can only be analyzed
from a quality blood test.
And now with the advent of DNA tests,
we can get further insight and information
into how our metabolism is working,
how our brain is functioning,
how our endocrine system,
meaning our hormone system is functioning.
One of the issues with a lot of companies
and programs that involve
getting blood and DNA tests,
however, is that you get
the information back,
you don't know what to
do with that information.
With InsideTracker, they
make all of that very easy.
First of all, they can send someone
to your home to take
the samples, if you like
or you can go to a local clinic.
You get the information
back and, of course,
you get all the numbers and
levels of hormone factors,
metabolic factors, et cetera,
but the dashboard at
InsideTracker provides directives
so that if you want to
bring those numbers up
or bring them down, or
if you want to keep them
in the same range, it
points to specific regimens
related to nutrition, exercise,
and other lifestyle factors
so you can really move
around those numbers
to best suit your health
goals and health status.
If you want to try InsideTracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman,
and you'll get 25% off any
of InsideTracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by Headspace.
Headspace is a meditation
app that's backed
by 25 published studies.
And in addition to those,
there are hundreds of studies showing
that meditation is
beneficial for our brain
and for our body.
One of the challenges, however,
is maintaining a meditation practice.
I started meditating a long time ago,
but I found it very hard to
keep that practice going.
Then I discovered the
Headspace meditation app
and what I found was that
because they have meditations
that are very short, as
well as some that are longer
and some that are much longer,
I could maintain my meditation practice.
Sometimes I do a short
five-minute meditation,
sometimes I do 20-minute meditation,
I try and meditate at
least 20 minutes per day,
but sometimes, some weeks, I
only do it five times a week
and I'll just meditate for longer.
So with Headspace, you
have the full palette
of meditations to select from.
If you want to try Headspace,
you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer.
And if you do that, you'll
get a free one-month trial
so no cost whatsoever,
with their full library of meditations.
So that's the best offer that they have.
So, again, if you want to try Headspace
and you want to get access to
all their meditations for free
go to headspace.com/specialoffer.
Can you hear me?
Okay, well, if you can
hear me, that's amazing
because what it means is that my voice
is causing little tiny
changes in the airwaves
wherever you happen to be.
And that your ears and whatever's
contained in those ears
and in your brain can
take those sound waves
and make sense of them.
And that is an absolutely fantastic
and staggering feat of
biology and yet we understand
a lot about how that process works.
So I'm going to teach it
to you now in simple terms
over the next few minutes.
So what we call ears
have a technical name.
That technical name is oracles,
but more often they're called pinna,
the pinnas, P-I-N-N-A, pinna.
And the pinnas of your ears,
this outer part that is
made of cartilage and stuff
is arranged such that it can capture sound
in the best way for your head size.
We're going to talk about ear size also,
'cause it turns out that
your ears change size
across the lifespan and
that how big your ears are
or rather how fast your
ears are changing size
is a pretty good indication
of how fast you're aging.
So we'll get to that in a few minutes,
but I want to talk about
these things that we call ears
and some of the stuff
contained within them
that allow us to hear.
So the shape of these ears that we have
is such that it amplifies
high-frequency sounds.
High frequency sounds,
as the name suggests,
is the squeakier stuff.
So low frequency sound, Costello
snoring in the background
that's a low frequency sound
or high frequency sound, okay?
So we have low frequency sounds
and high frequency sounds
and everything in between.
Now those sound waves
get captured by our ears.
And those sound waves, for those of you
that don't maybe fully
conceptualize sound waves,
are literally just fluctuations or shifts
in the way that air is
moving toward your ear
and through space.
In the same way that water can have waves,
air can have waves.
So it's reverberation of air.
Those come in through your ears
and you have what's called your eardrum.
And on the inside of your eardrum,
there's a little bony thing that shaped
like a little hammer.
So attached to that eardrum,
which can move back and forth like a drum,
it's a little membrane, you
got this hammer attached to it.
And that hammer has three parts.
For those of you that want to know,
those three parts are called
malleus, incus and stapes.
But basically, you can just
think about it as a hammer.
So you've got this
eardrum and then a hammer.
And then that hammer has
to hammer on something.
And what it does is it hammers
on a little coiled piece
of tissue that we call the cochlea,
sometimes called the cochlea,
depending on where somebody
lives in the country.
So, typically, in the
Midwest, on the East Coast,
they call them coh-chleah.
And on the West Coast, we call
them caw-cochlea, same thing.
So this snail-shaped
structure in your inner ear
is where sound gets converted
into electrical signals
that the brain can understand.
But I want to just bring your attention
to that little hammer
because that little hammer
is really, really cool.
What it means is that sound
waves come in through your ears,
that's what's happening right now,
that eardrum that you have,
it's like the top of a drum.
It's like a membrane, or
it can move back and forth.
It's not super rigid and it
moves that little hammer.
And then the hammer
goes, doom-doom-doom-doom
and hits this coil-shaped thing
that we're calling the cochlea.
Now the cochlea, at one end,
is more rigid than the other.
So one part can move really easily
and the other part
doesn't move very easily.
And that turns out to be very important
for decoding or separating
sounds that are low frequency
like Costello's snoring and sounds
that are of high frequency,
like a shriek or a shrill.
And that's because within
that little coil thing,
we call the cochlea, you
have all these tiny little
what are called hair cells.
Now they look like hairs, but
they're not at all related
to the hairs on your head
or elsewhere on your body.
They're just shaped like hair,
so we call them hair cells.
Those hair cells, if they move,
send signals into the brain
that a particular sound
is in our environment.
And if those hair cells don't move,
it means that particular sound
is not in our environment.
So just to give you the
mental picture of this,
sound waves are coming in,
because there's stuff out there,
making noises like my voice;
it's changing the
patterns of air around you
in very, very subtle ways;
that information is getting
funneled into your ears
because your pinnas are
shaped in a particular way.
The eardrum then moves this little hammer
and the hammer bangs on this
little snail-shaped thing.
And because that snail-shaped
thing, at one end,
is very rigid, it doesn't want to move
and at the other end, it's very flexible,
it can separate out high-frequency
and low-frequency sounds.
And the fact that this
thing in your inner ear
that we call the cochlea is coiled,
is actually really important to understand
because along its length,
it varies in how rigid or flexible it is,
I already mentioned that
before and at the base,
it's very rigid and that's
where the hair cells,
if they move, will make
high-frequency sounds,
and at the top, what's called the apex,
it's very flexible and
it's more like a bass drum.
So basically what happens
is sound waves come
into your ears and then
at one end of this thing
that we call the cochlea, at the top,
it's essentially encoding
or only responding
to sounds that are like,
doom-doom-doom-doom.
Whereas, at the bottom, it
responds to high-frequency sounds
like a cymbal, [clanging].
And everywhere in between,
we have other frequencies,
medium frequencies.
Now this should stagger your mind.
If it doesn't already, it should.
Because what this means is that everything
that's happening around us,
whether or not it's
music or voices or crying
or screaming or screaming of
delight from small children
who are excited, 'cause they're playing
or 'cause they get cake;
all of that is being broken
down into its component parts
and then your brain is making
sense of what it means.
These things that I've been talking about,
like the pinna of your
ears and this little hammer
and the cochlea, that's
all purely mechanical.
It has no mind of its own.
It's just breaking things
down into high frequencies,
medium frequencies and low frequencies.
And if you don't
understand sound frequency,
it's really simple to understand,
just imagine ripples on a pond.
And if those ripples
are very close together,
that's high frequency; they
occur at high frequency.
If those ripples are further
apart, it's low frequency.
And obviously, medium
frequency is in between.
So just like you can have waves in water,
you can have waves in air.
So that's really how it works.
Now we are all familiar with light
and how, if you take a prism
and put it in front of light,
it will split that light into
its different wavelengths,
its different colors, red,
green, blue, et cetera.
So like the Pink Floyd "Dark
Side of the Moon" album,
I think, has a prism and
it's converting white light
into all the colors, all the wavelengths
that are contained in white light.
Your cochlea, essentially,
acts as a prism.
It takes all the sound in your environment
and it splits up those sounds
into different frequencies.
So you can think of the
cochlea of your ear,
sort of like a prism
and then the brain takes
that information and puts it back together
and makes sense of it.
So those hair cells in
each of your two cochlea,
because you have two ears,
you also have two cochlea,
send little wires, what we call axons
that convey their patterns
of activity into the brain.
And there are a number
of different stations
within the brain that
information arrives at
before it gets up to
the parts of your brain,
where you are consciously aware.
And because some of you
have asked for more names
and nomenclature, I'll give that to you.
If you don't want a lot of detailed names,
you can just ignore what I'm about to say.
But, basically, the
cochlea send information
to what's called the spiral ganglion.
A ganglion, by the way,
if you're going to learn
any neuroscience, just know
that anytime you hear ganglion,
a ganglion is just a clump, so
it means a bunch of neurons.
So a clump of cells.
So the spiral ganglion
is a bunch of neurons
that the information then goes off
to what are called the cochlear
nuclei in the brainstem.
Brainstem is down near your neck,
then up to a structure
that has a really cool name
called the superior olive,
because you have one on
each side of your brain.
And if I were to bring
you to my lab and show you
the superior olives in your
brain or anyone else's brain,
they look like little olives,
even that little divot in them that to me,
it looks like a pimiento,
but they just call them
the superior olive.
And then the neurons
in the superior olive,
then they send information up
to what's called the inferior colliculus,
only called inferior because it sits below
a structure called the
superior colliculus.
And then the information
goes up to what's called
the medial geniculate nucleus.
And then up to your neocortex
where you make sense of it all.
Now you don't have to remember all that,
but you should know that
there are a lot of stations
in which auditory information is processed
before it gets up to
our conscious detection.
And there is a good reason for that,
which is that more important than knowing
what you're hearing, you need to know
where it's coming from.
It's vital to our survival,
that if something, for instance,
is falling toward us, that
we know if it's coming
to our right side, if it's
going to hit us from behind,
we have to know, for instance,
if a car is coming at us from
our left or from our right.
And our visual system can help with that.
But our auditory and our
visual system collaborate
to help us find and locate the
position of things in space.
That should come as no surprise.
If you hear somebody
talking off to your right,
you tend to turn to your
right, not to your left.
If you see somebody's mouth
moving in front of you,
you tend to assume that
the sound is going to come
from right in front of you.
Disruptions in this auditory hearing
and visual matching are actually the basis
of what's called the ventriloquism effect,
which we'll talk about in a
few minutes in more depth.
But the ventriloquism effect
can basically be described
in simple terms as when
you essentially think
that a sound is coming from a location
that it's not actually coming from.
We'll talk about that in a moment
but what I'd like you to realize
is that one of these stations,
deep in your brainstem
is responsible for helping
you identify where sounds
are coming from through a process
that's called interaural time differences.
And that sounds fancy, but really,
the way you know where
things are coming from,
what direction a car or a boss
or a person is coming from
is because the sound lands
in one ear before the other.
And you have stations in your brain,
meaning you have neurons in your brain
that calculate the
difference in time of arrival
for those sound waves in your
right versus your left ear.
And if they arrive at the same time,
you assume that thing is making
noise right in front of you.
If it's off to your right,
you assume it's over on your right.
And if the sound arrives
first to your left ear,
you assume, quite correctly,
that the thing is coming
toward your left ear.
So it's a very simple
and mechanical system
at the level of sound localization.
But what about up and down?
If you think about it, a
sound coming from above
is going to land on your right ear
and your left ear at the same time.
A sound from below is going
to land on your right ear
and your left ear at the same time.
So the way that we know where things are
in terms of what's called elevation,
where they are in the up and down plane
is by the frequencies.
The shape of your ears
actually modifies the sound
depending on whether or not
it's coming straight at you,
from the floor or from high above.
And so already at the level of your ears,
you are taking information
about the outside world
and determining where that
information is coming from.
Now, this all happens very,
very fast and it's subconscious
but now you know why if people
really want to hear something,
they make a cup around their ear.
They essentially make their ear
into more of a fennec fox type ear.
If you've ever seen those
cute little fennec fox things,
they have these big spiky ears,
they look like a French bulldog,
although the fox version
version of the French bulldog.
This big, tall ears,
and they have excellent
sound localization.
And so when people lean in with their ear,
with their hand like this,
if you're listening to this,
I'm just cupping my hand at my ear,
I'm giving myself a bigger pinna.
And if I do it on the left
side, I can do this side.
And if I really want to hear
something, I do it on both sides.
So this isn't just gesturing,
this actually serves a mechanical role.
And actually, if you
want to hear where things
are coming from with a much
greater degree of accuracy,
this can actually help because
you're capturing sound waves
and funneling them better.
It's really remarkable, this whole system.
So you've got these two ears
and because of the differences
in the timing of when things
arrive in those two ears,
as well as these differences
in the frequencies
that certain things sound,
or I should say the
differences in the frequencies
that arrive at your ears,
depending on whether or
not the thing is above you
or right in front of you or below you,
you're able to make out where things are
in space pretty well.
So now you're probably starting to realize
that these two things
on the side of our head
that we call ears are there for a lot more
than hanging earrings on or
for other aesthetic purposes
or for putting sunglasses on top of.
They are very powerful devices
for allowing us to capture sound
waves from our environment.
Now I have a question for you,
which is, can you move your ears?
It turns out that unlike other animals,
humans are not terrifically
good at moving their ears.
Other animals can move their
ears even independently.
So Costello is pretty
good at raising his ears,
the two of them together,
He can't really move his ear separately.
Some dogs can do that really well.
In fact, sighthounds and some scenthounds
do that exquisitely well.
Some animals like deer and other animals
that really have very acute hearing
will put one ear down to
a very particular angle
and will tilt the other one
and they will actually capture information
about two distant sound-making organisms,
those could be hunters coming after them
or other animals coming after them.
They are very good at doing this.
We're not so good at it.
But about 60% of people, it's thought,
can move their ears consciously
without having to touch their ear.
So can you do that?
Maybe you should try it.
Ask someone to look at you
and see whether or not you can do it.
The typical distances
that people can move it
is usually no more than
two or three millimeters.
It's subtle but can you flap your pinna
with just using mental control?
If you can, or if you can't,
try looking all the way to your right
or all the way to your left.
Obviously, if you're driving a car
or doing something or exercising,
don't put yourself in danger right now.
But if you move your eyes
all the way to your left,
which I'm doing now or
all the way to my right,
you might feel a little bit of
a contraction of the muscles
that control ear movement.
Now I want to ask you this:
can you raise one eyebrow?
I'm not very good at it,
I can do a little bit,
but it's mostly by like cramping
down my face on one side.
And I certainly can't
raise my right eyebrow.
I can only do my left eyebrow.
Trying to talk while I'm doing this,
that's why it looks strange.
People who can raise
one eyebrow very easily,
almost always, can move their ears
without having to touch them.
It's controlled by the same motor pathway.
And there does seem to be a small,
but statistically
significant sex difference
in the ability to move one's ears.
Typically, men can do
this more than women can,
although plenty of women
can move their ears as well.
Now, if you think that is all
a little strange or off topic,
it's not because what we're
really talking about here
is a system of the brain,
but also of the body
of the musculature for
localizing things in space.
And so you might find
it interesting to note
that one of the things
that we share very closely
with other primates,
with non-human primates,
like macaque monkeys and chimpanzees,
if you look at their ears,
their ears are remarkably
similar to our ears,
or rather our ears are
remarkably similar to their ears.
The eyes of certain monkeys
like macaque monkeys
are remarkably similar to human eyes.
This is one of the reasons why,
if you look at a baby macaque monkey,
it has this unbelievably
human element to it.
But the ears of these
primates is very similar
to our ears; our ears,
similar to their ears.
If you're interested in ear movements
and what they could mean
and some of the things
that ear movements correlate
with in other aspects
of our biology, there's
a nice paper, actually,
a scientific paper.
The author's last name is Code, C-O-D-E,
it was published in 1995.
I'll give a reference to that.
It's a review article that discusses
some of the sex differences
in ear movement control,
as well as the relationship
between ear movements
and eye movements.
And it's a pretty accessible paper.
It's one that I think any
of you who are interested
in this topic could parse fairly easily.
And there's some very
interesting underlying biology
and some theories as to why humans
would have this so-called vestigial
or ancient carry-over of a
system for moving our ears.
Now, if ear movement seems strange,
next, I want to talk
about a different feature
of your hearing and ears
that's even stranger,
but that has some really
interesting implications
for your biology.
And I'm guessing that
you've not heard of this.
What am I about to describe
are called otoacoustic emissions.
And otoacoustic emissions,
as the name suggests,
are sounds that your ears make.
Believe it or not, 70%
of people make noises
with their ears, but they
don't actually detect them.
Like I said, you've never heard of this.
Okay, that's not what I mean.
But what I do mean is
that 70% of people's ears
are making noise that's
cast out of the ear.
And these otoacoustic emissions, actually,
can be detected by microphones.
Sometimes they can be
detected by other people
in the room if they
have very good hearing.
Now, it turns out that women
or, I should be technical here,
females who report
themselves as heterosexual,
have a higher frequency,
not frequency of sound,
but a higher frequency
of otoacoustic emissions
than do men who report
themselves as heterosexual.
Women who report themselves
as homosexual or bisexual,
make fewer otoacoustic emissions
than heterosexual women.
These are data that come
from Dennis McFadden's lab
at the University of Texas, Austin.
He actually discovered these,
what are called sexual
dimorphisms and differences
based on sexual orientation
without looking for them.
He was studying hearing.
He's a auditory scientist
and people were coming
into his laboratory
and they were detecting
these otoacoustic emissions.
And they started to notice
the group differences
in otoacoustic emissions.
So they started asking
people about their sex
and about their sexual orientation.
And these differences fell
out of the data, as we say.
And it's interesting because
otoacoustic emissions
are not something that we associate
with sex or sexual dimorphism.
But what these data really
underscore is, first of all,
a lot of us are making
noises with our ears,
some of us more than others.
And that exposure to certain
combinations of hormones
during development are
very likely shaping the way
that our hearing apparati,
meaning the cochlea
and the pinna and all sorts of things,
how those develop and how those functions
throughout the lifespan.
We did do an episode on
hormones and sexual development,
which gets much deeper
into the other effects
that hormones have on the
developing brain and body.
If you want to check out that episode,
we will put a link to it in the captions.
So now I want to shift to talking
about ways to leverage
your hearing system,
your auditory system so
that you can learn anything,
not just auditory information,
but anything faster.
I get a lot of questions about
so-called binaural beats.
Binaural beats, as their name suggests,
involve playing one
frequency of sound to one ear
and a different frequency
of sound to the other ear.
So it might be doomed, doon,
doon, doon to your right ear,
and it might be to
ding-ding-ding-ding-ding-ding
to the left ear.
And the idea is that the brain
will take those two frequencies of sound
and because the pathways
that bring information
from the ears into the
brain, eventually crossover,
they actually share that
information with both sides
of the brain, that the brain
will average that information
and come up with this sort
of intermediate frequency.
And the rationale is that
those intermediate frequencies
place the brain into a state
that is better for learning.
And when I say better for learning,
I want to be precise about what I mean.
That could mean more focus for encoding
or bringing the information in.
As you may have heard me say before,
we have to be alert and
focused in order to learn.
There is no passive learning
unless we're little tiny infants.
So can binaural beats
make us more focused?
Can binaural beats allow us to
relax more if we're anxious?
I know some people, they go to the dentist
and the dentist offers binaural beats
as they drill into your
teeth and give root canals
and things of that sort,
probably causing some anxiety
just describing those things right now.
But those are available
in many dental practices.
Binaural beats have been
thought to increase creativity,
or at least they have been
proposed to increase creativity.
So what does the scientific
data say about binaural beats?
There are a number of
different apps out there
that offer binaural beats.
There are a number of different programs.
I think you can also even
just find these on YouTube
and on the internet.
But typically, it's an
app and you'll program in
a particular outcome that you want:
more focused, more creative, fall asleep,
less anxious, et cetera.
So what does the scientific data say?
So believe it or not, the
science on binaural beats
is actually quite
extensive and very precise.
So sound waves are measured, typically,
in hertz or kilohertz.
I know many of you aren't familiar
with thinking about things
in hertz or kilohertz.
But again, just remember
those waves on a pond,
those ripples on a pond.
If they're close together, then
they are of high-frequency.
And if they're far apart, than
they are of low frequency.
So when you hear more hertz,
what you're essentially
hearing is higher frequency.
And so if it's many more kilohertz
then it's much higher frequency
than if it's fewer hertz or kilohertz.
And so you may have heard of
these things as delta waves
or theta waves or alpha waves
or beta waves, et cetera.
Delta waves would be big,
slow waves, so low frequency.
And, indeed, there is quality evidence
from peer-reviewed studies
that are not sponsored
by companies that make binaural beat apps
that tell us that delta
waves like one to four hertz,
so very low frequency sounds,
think Costello's snoring,
can help in the transition to
sleep and for staying asleep.
And that theta rhythms,
which are more like four to eight hertz
can bring the brain into
a state of subtle sleep
or meditation, so deeply
relaxed, but not fully asleep.
And then you can sort of ascend
the staircase of findings
here, so to speak.
And you'll find evidence that alpha waves,
eight to 13 hertz can increase alertness
to a moderate level.
That's a great state
for the brain to be in
for recall of existing information.
And that beta waves, 15 to 20 hertz
are great for bringing the brain
into focus states for sustained thought
or for incorporating new information
and especially gamma waves,
the highest frequency,
the most frequent ripples
of sound, so to speak,
32 to 100 hertz for learning
and problem-solving.
Now, all of this matches, or I should say,
maps onto what I've said before
about learning really nicely,
which is that you need to
be in a highly alert state
in order to bring new information in,
in order to access a state of mind
in which you can tell
your brain or the brain
is telling itself, okay,
I need to learn this.
This is why stress and
unfortunate circumstances
are so memorable is because our brain gets
into a really high alert system.
Here, we're talking about
the use of binaural beats
in order to increase
our level of alertness
or our level of calmness.
Now that's important to
underscore because it's not
that there's something
fundamentally important
about the binaural beats.
They are yet another way
of bringing the brain
into states of deep relaxation
through low frequency sound
or highly alert states
for focused learning with
more high-frequency sound.
So they are effective and
I'll review a little bit
of the data in detail, they're effective,
but it's not that they're
uniquely special for learning.
It's just that they can
help some people bring
their brain into the state that
allows them to learn better.
So there are a lot of studies
that allowed us to arrive,
or I should say allowed
the field to arrive
on these parameters of slow, slow,
low frequency waves are going to
bring you into relaxed states,
high frequency waves
into more alert states.
There's very good evidence
for anxiety reduction
from the use of binaural beats.
And what's interesting is
anxiety reduction seems
to be most effective
when the binaural beats
are bringing the brain into delta,
so those slow big waves like
sleep, theta and alpha states.
And I'll link to a couple of these studies
although I will probably
link more to the list
that really segregates them out one by one
so you can see them all
next to one another.
There's good evidence that binaural beats
can be used to treat pain, chronic pain.
There's three studies in
peer-reviewed journals
which I took a look at, and
they seem to be of good quality,
not sponsored research, as we say,
not paid for by any specific company.
Binaural beats have been shown
to modestly improve cognition,
attention, working memory
and even creativity.
But the real boost from
binaural beats appears
to be for anxiety reduction
and pain reduction.
Some people might find these beneficial
for these oral surgeries, right?
Believe it or not, there are people
who would rather have
the entire root canal
or cavity drilled without Novocaine.
And that's because they
sometimes have a syringe phobia
or something of that sort
or they just don't like being
numb from the Novocaine,
or maybe there's an
underlying medical reason.
But I think most people
do don't enjoy getting
their teeth drilled even if
they have Novocaine in there
or a root canal.
And so it seems that binaural
beats can be effective
in that environment.
And you don't have to go
into that sort of extreme environment
to benefit from binaural beats.
Binaural beats are a either
relatively inexpensive thing
to access, most of the apps
are pretty inexpensive.
I don't have a favorite binaural beats app
to recommend to you.
I confess I did use binaural
beats a few years ago.
I shifted over to other what I call NSDR,
non-sleep deep rest
protocols in favor of those,
but many people like binaural beats
and say that they benefit from them,
especially while studying or learning.
I think part of the
reason for that relates
to the ability to channel our focus
when we have some background noise.
And this is something I
also get asked about a lot.
Is it better to listen to
music and have background noise
when studying or is it better
to have complete silence?
Well, there's actually
a quite good literature
on this as well, but not
so much as it relates
to binaural beats, but
rather whether or not people
are listening to music, so-called
white noise, brown noise;
believe it or not, there's white noise
and there's brown noise,
there's even pink noise
and how that impacts brain states
that allow us to learn
information better or not.
So now I'd like to talk about white noise
and I want to be very
clear that white noise
has been shown to really enhance
brain states for learning
in certain individuals,
in particular, in adults.
But white noise actually can
have a detrimental effect
on auditory learning and
maybe even the development
of the auditory system
in very young children
in particular in infants.
So first I'd like to talk
about the beneficial effects
of white noise on learning.
There are some really
excellent studies on this.
The first one that I'd like
to just highlight is one that's entitled:
Low Intensity White Noise
Improves Performance
in Auditory Working Memory
Task, an fMRI Study.
This is a study that explored
whether or not learning could be enhanced
by playing white noise in the background.
But the strength of the
study is that they looked
at some of the underlying neural circuitry
and the activation of the neural circuitry
in these people as they
did the learning task.
And what it, essentially, illustrates
is that white noise,
provided that white noise
is of low enough intensity,
meaning not super loud,
not imperceptible, so not so
quiet that you can't hear it,
but not super loud either,
it actually could enhance
learning to a significant degree.
And this has been shown now
for a huge number of
different types of learning.
There's a terrific article as well
in a somewhat obscure journal, at least,
obscure to me, which is:
The Effects of Noise Exposure
on Cognitive Performance
and Brain Activity Patterns.
That's a study involving 54 subjects.
They, basically, were
evaluated for mental workload
and attention under different
levels of noise exposure,
background noise and
different, essentially,
loudness of noise.
And the reason I like this
study is that they looked
at different levels of
noise and types of noise,
and they varied a number
of different things,
as opposed to just doing a two-condition,
either white noise or no
white noise type thing.
And what they found, again, is
that provided the white noise
is not extremely loud,
it could really enhance brain function
for sake of learning any number
of different kinds of information.
Now that's all great, but
it really doesn't get to
the deeper guts of mechanism.
And as a neuroscientist,
what I really want to see
is not just that something has an effect.
That's always nice.
It's always nice to see in
a nice peer-reviewed study
without any kind of commercial biases
that there's an effect, binaural
beats can enhance learning
or listening to white noise, not too loud
can enhance learning.
But you really want to
understand mechanism
because once you understand mechanism,
not only does it start to make sense,
but you can also imagine ways in which
you could develop better
tools and protocols.
So I was very relieved to find,
or I should say excited to
find this study published
in the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
this is a 2014 paper, White
Noise Improves Learning
by Modulating Activity in
Dopaminergic Mid-Brain Regions
and Right Superior Temporal Sulcus.
Now I don't expect you to know
what the right spirit temporal sulcus is.
I don't expect you to know
what the dopamine midbrain
region is, but if you're like me,
you probably took highlighted notice
of the word dopaminergic.
Dopamine is a neuromodulator,
meaning it's a chemical
that's released in our brain and body,
but mostly in our brain that modulates,
meaning controls the likelihood
that certain brain areas will be active
and other brain areas won't be active.
And dopamine is associated
with motivation.
Dopamine is associated with craving.
Motivation is associated with
all sorts of different things,
including movement but what
this study so nicely shows
is that white noise can really enhance
the activity of neurons in what's called
the substantia nigra VTA.
The substantia nigra VTA is a
very rich source of dopamine
and that's because it's
very chockablock full
of dopamine neurons.
It's an area of the
brain that is, perhaps,
the richest source of dopamine neurons.
And you actually can see this brain region
under the microscope if
you take a slice of brain
or you look at a brain
without even staining it
for any proteins or dopamine or anything.
It's two very dark regions
at the bottom of the brain.
And the reason it's
called substantia nigra,
nigra meaning dark is
because the dopamine neurons
actually make something that
makes those neurons dark.
And so you've got these
two regions down there,
that contain dopamine
and can release dopamine
and, essentially, activate
other brain regions
and activate our sense of motivation
and activate our sense of desire
to continue focusing and learning.
But you can't just snap your fingers
and make them release dopamine.
You actually have to trigger
dopamine release from them.
Now that trigger can be
caused by being very excited
about something or the fact
that that thing gave you
a lot of pleasure in the past,
or you're highly motivated
by fear or desire.
But what's so interesting
to me is that it appears
that white noise itself can
raise what we call the basal,
the baseline levels of dopamine
that are being released
from this area, the substantia nigra.
So now we're starting to
get a more full picture
of how particular sounds
in our environment
can increase learning.
And that's, in part, I believe,
through the release of
dopamine from substantia nigra.
So I'm not trying to shift
you away from binaural beats,
if that's your thing, but it does appear
that turning on white noise
at a low level, not too loud.
You may say, "Well, how loud?"
And I'll tell you in a moment,
but not too loud can
allow you to learn better
because of the ways that it's modulating
your brain chemistry.
So how loud or how soft
should that white noise be
while you learn?
Well, in these studies,
it seemed that white noise
that could be heard by the person,
so it wasn't imperceptible to them,
so it was loud enough that they
could hear, but not so loud
that they felt it was intrusive
or irritating to them.
So that's going to differ
from person to person
because people have different levels
of auditory sensitivity.
It's going to depend
on age, going to depend
on a number of different factors.
So I can't tell you turn to level two
on your volume controller.
That's just not going to work.
Also, I don't know how far you are
from a given speaker in the room
or if you've got earphones in your head
or you've got speakers in the room
or if it's coming out of your computer.
I don't know those things.
So what you're going
to have to do is adjust
that white noise to the place
where it's not interfering
with your ability to focus,
but rather it's enhancing
your ability to focus.
I think a good rule of thumb
is going to be to put it
probably on the lower third
of any kind of volume dial,
as opposed to in the upper third,
where it would really be blasting.
And really blasting any
noise, frankly, is not good,
but that's especially not good,
meaning it's especially bad
if you have headphones in.
I do want to mention
something about headphones
before I talk about white noise
in the developmental context
and why it can be dangerous there.
When you put headphones in your ears,
it has this incredible
effect of making the sounds
like they come from inside your head,
not from out in the room.
And now that might seem
like kind of a duh,
but that's actually really amazing, right?
Your brain assumes that the sounds
are coming from inside your head,
as opposed from the environment
that you're in the moment
you put headphones in.
So if you're listening to an audiobook
or maybe you're listening to
this podcast with headphones,
that's very different
than when you're listening
to something out in the room
and there are other sounds,
other sound waves, especially if you use
these noise-cancellation headphones.
So if you're going to use
white noise to enhance studying
or learning of any
kind, this also could be
for skill-learning, motor skill-learning
while you're exercising,
my suggestion would be
that if you're using headphones,
to keep it quite low.
This is an effect on the
midbrain dopamine neurons
that's a background effect of raising
the baseline of dopamine release.
The way that dopamine neurons
fires, they're always firing;
yours are firing right now, so are mine,
when something exciting
happens, they fire a lot.
And when something disappointing happens,
that firing, the release of dopamine
goes down below baseline.
What you're talking about here is raising
your overall levels of
attention and motivation,
which translate to better learning
by just tickling those
neurons a little bit,
raising the baseline firing.
You're not turning up the white noise
to the point where you're feeling amazing.
This isn't like turning
on your favorite song.
This is actually the opposite.
This is about getting that
baseline up just a bit.
So I recommend turning
the volume up just a bit
so that you can focus entirely on the task
that you're trying to do.
And, of course, you've
turned on white noise
so your attention might
drift to that for a moment.
Is it too loud? Is it too soft?
If you can disappear into
the work, so to speak,
if your attention can
disappear into the work,
then that's probably sufficiently quiet.
And for those of you that say,
well, I like really loud music
and if I just blast the music,
then I forget about the music.
I don't suggest blasting music.
And this is coming from somebody
who really likes loud music.
I grew up with kind of a
loud fast rules mentality,
and if you don't know what
loud fast rules means,
then I can't help you, but
there's a time and a place,
perhaps, to listen to music loud
but, especially, with headphones,
you can trigger, excuse me,
hearing loss quite rapidly.
And unfortunately,
because these hair cells
that we talked about earlier,
our central nervous system
neurons, they do not regenerate,
they do not come back.
Now along the lines of hearing loss,
I should just say that the best way
to blow out your hearing for good,
to eliminate your hearing
is to have very loud sounds
super imposed on a loud environment.
So loud environments can
cause hearing loss over time.
So if you work at a construction
site, clanging really loud,
or if you work the sound
board in a club or something,
you are headed towards hearing loss
unless you protect your hearing
with earplugs and headphones.
Nowadays, some of the ear
plugs are very low profile,
meaning you can't see them.
So that's kind of nice,
so you're not like the,
when I was younger, like you
didn't want to be the dork
to go to the concert with the earplugs,
but it turns out those dorks were smarter
than everybody else,
because they're not the ones
who are craning their neck to
try and hear trivial things
at the age of 30 or so 'cause
they blew out their hearing.
So if you are working
in a loud environment
or you expose yourselves
to a loud environment,
you really want to avoid big inflections
in sound above that.
So loud environment plus fireworks,
loud environment plus gunshot,
loud environments plus very
high-frequency intense sound,
that's what we call the two-hit model,
this is also true for concussion,
that you can take a stimulus that normally
would be below the threshold of injury,
you add another stimulus at the same time,
that would be below the
threshold of injury.
And then, suddenly,
you killed the neurons.
So I don't want to make people paranoid,
but you do want to protect your hearing.
It's no fun to lose your hearing.
If you're going to use
headphones and you feel
like you want to crank it up all the way,
just remember that the
more that you can get
out of a lower volume, meaning the longer
that you can go listening
to things at lower volume,
the longer you'll be able to
hear that music or that thing.
So again, I'm not the hearing cop.
That's not my job, but
as somebody who's lost
some of his high-frequency hearing,
I can tell you it's not a pleasure.
The old argument that it
helps you not have to hear
or listen to people that
you don't want to listen to,
that does it doesn't really work.
They just send you text messages instead.
So what about white noise and
hearing loss in development?
I know a lot of people with children
have these noise machines like sound waves
and things like that,
that help the kids sleep.
And look, I think kids getting good sleep
and parents getting good sleep is vital
to physical and mental
health and family health.
So I certainly sympathize
with those needs.
However, there are data that indicate
that white noise during development
can be detrimental to the auditory system.
I don't want to frighten any parents
if you played white noise to your kids,
this doesn't mean that
their auditory system
or their speech patterns
are going to be disrupted
or that their interpretation of speech
is going to be disrupted forever.
But there are data published
in the journal, Science,
and Science being one of
the three, APEX Journal,
Science, Nature, Cell, the
most stringent journals,
data published in the journal,
Science, some years ago,
actually by a scientist
who I know quite well,
his name is Edward Chang,
he's a medical doctor now,
he's a neurosurgeon, he's actually
the chair of neurosurgery at UCSF
and he runs a laboratory where
they study auditory learning,
neuroplasticity, et cetera,
he and his mentor at the time,
Mike Merzenich published a paper showing
that if young animals and
this was in animal models
were exposed to white noise, so [shushing]
the very type of noise that
I'm saying as a older person,
and when I say older,
I mean, somebody who's
in their late teens, early 20s and older
could benefit from listening
to that at a low level
in the background for sake of learning,
well, they exposed very young
animals to this white noise,
it actually disrupted the
maps of the auditory world
within the brain.
And we haven't talked
about these maps yet,
but I want to take a
moment and talk about them
and explain this effect and
what it might mean for you
if you have kids or if you were exposed
to a lot of white noise early on.
So auditory information goes
up into our cortex, into these,
essentially, the outside
portion of our brain
that's responsible for all
our higher level cognition
and our planning, our
decision-making, et cetera,
creativity and up there,
we have what are called tonotopic maps.
What's a tonotopic map?
Well, remember the
cochlea, how it's coiled
and at one end, it responds
to high frequencies
and the other end, it
responds to low frequencies?
Like a piano, the keys sound different
as you extend down and up the piano keys.
And it's organized in
a very systematic way.
It's not all intermixed high frequencies
and low frequencies.
It's organized in a very systematic way
from one end to the other.
Your visual system is in,
what's called a retinotopic map.
So neighboring points in
space off to my right,
like my two fingers off to my right
are mapped to neighboring
points in space in my brain.
And that space right in front of me
is mapped to a different
location in my brain,
but it's systematic, it's regular.
It's not random. It's not salt and pepper.
It goes from high to low or
from right to center to left.
In the auditory system,
we have what are called tonotopic maps,
where frequency, high
frequency to low frequency
and everything in between is organized
in a very systematic way.
Now our experience of life from the time
we're a baby until the time
that we die is not systematic.
We don't hear low frequencies
at one part of the room
or at one part of the
day and high frequencies
is another part of the room
and other part of the day,
they're all intermixed.
But if you remember, the
cochlea separates them out.
Just like a prism of light separates out
the different wavelengths of light,
the cochlea separates out
the different frequencies.
And the developing brain takes
those separated out frequencies
and learns this relationship
between itself, meaning the
child and the outside world.
White noise, essentially contains
no tonotopic information.
The frequencies are all intermixed.
It's just noise.
Whereas when I speak, my voice has,
now I'm getting technical,
but it has what's called
a certain envelope, meaning
it has some low frequencies
and some slightly higher frequency.
Like I might a voice higher,
although I'm not very good at that.
My voice starts to crack and
I can make my voice lower,
although not as low as Costello's snore.
So it has an envelope, it has a container.
White noise has no container.
It's like all the colors of the
rainbow spread out together,
which is actually what you
get when you get white light
white noise is analogous to white light.
So one of the reasons why
hearing a lot of white noise
during development for
long periods of time can be
detrimental to the development
of the auditory system
is that these tonotopic
maps don't form normally;
at least, they don't in
experimental animals.
Now, the reason I'm raising this
is that many people I know, in particular,
friends who have small children, they say,
"I want to use a white
noise machine while I sleep.
But is it okay for my baby to
use a white noise machine?"
And I consulted with various
people, scientists about this.
And they said, "Well,
the baby is also hearing
the parent's voices and is hearing music
and it's hearing the dog bark.
So it's not the only
thing they're hearing."
However, every single person
that I consulted with said,
"But there's neuroplasticity during sleep.
That's when the kid is sleeping.
And I don't know that you'd
want to expose a child
to white noise the entire night,
because it might degrade
that tonotopic map."
It might not destroy it.
It might not eliminate it,
but it could make it a little less clear,
like taking the keys on the piano
and taping a few of them together, right?
So you still got the highs and
lows in the appropriate order
and everything in between.
But when you take the keys together,
you don't get the same fidelity.
You don't get the same
precision of the noise
that comes out of that piano.
So, again, I don't want to scare anybody,
but I would say if you are in a position
to make the choice of
either using white noise
or something similar, pink
noise is just a variation.
It's got a little bit more
of a certain frequency,
just like pink light has a little bit more
of a certain wavelength than white light.
If you are in a position to make choices
about things, to put in a young,
especially very young
child's sleeping environment,
white noise might be something
to consider avoiding.
Again, I'm not telling you what to do,
but it's something to
perhaps consider avoiding.
I don't think most pediatricians
are going to be aware of these data,
but if you talk to any
auditory physiologists
or an audiologist or somebody
who studies auditory development,
I'm fairly certain that they
would have opinions about that.
Now, whether or not their
opinions agree with mine
and these folks that I
consulted with or not
is a separate matter.
I don't know, cause I don't know them,
but it's something that I
felt was important enough
to cue you to, especially
since I've highlighted,
excuse me, the opposite
effect is true in adulthood.
Once your auditory system has formed,
once it's established
these tonotopic maps,
then the presence of
background white noise
should not be a problem at all.
In fact, it shouldn't be a problem at all
because you're also not attending to it.
The idea is that it's playing
at a low enough volume
that you forget it in the background
and that it's supporting learning
by bringing your brain into a
heightened state of alertness
and, especially, this
heightened state of dopamine,
dopaminergic activation of the brain,
which will make it easier to learn faster
and easier to learn the information.
So now I want to talk
about auditory learning
and actually how you can get better
at learning information that you hear,
not just information
that you see on a page
or motor skill learning.
There are a lot of reasons
to want to do this.
A lot of classroom teaching,
whether or not it's by Zoom
or in-person is auditory in nature.
Not everything is necessarily
written down for us.
It's also good to get better
at listening or so I'm told.
So there's a phenomenon called
the cocktail party effect.
Now, even if you've never
been to a cocktail party,
you've experienced and participated
in what's called the
cocktail party effect.
The cocktail party effect is where you are
in an environment that's rich with sound,
many sound waves coming
from many different sources,
many different things,
so in a city, in a classroom,
in a car that contains people
having various conversations,
you somehow need to be able to
attend to specific components
of those sound waves, meaning you need
to hear certain people and not others.
The reason it's called
the cocktail party effect
is that you and meaning your brain
are exquisitely good at creating
a cone of auditory attention,
a narrow band of attention
with which you can extract
the information you care about
and wipe away or erase all the rest.
Now this takes work, it takes attention.
One of the reasons why
you might come home from
a loud gathering, maybe
a stadium, a sports event
or a cocktail party, for that matter,
and feel just exhausted is
because if you were listening
to conversations there or trying to listen
to those conversations
while watching the game
and people moving past you
and hearing all this noise,
clinking of glasses, et cetera,
it takes attentional effort
and the brain uses up
a lot of energy just at rest,
but it uses up even more energy
when you are paying strong
attention to something,
literally caloric energy
burning up things like glucose,
et cetera, even if you're
ketogenic, it's burning up energy.
So the cocktail party effect
has been studied extensively
in the field of
neuroscience and we now know
at a mechanistic level,
how one accomplishes
this feat of attending to certain sounds,
despite the fact that
we are being bombarded
with all sorts of other sounds.
So there are a couple
ways that we do this.
First of all, much as
with our visual system,
we can expand or contract
our visual field of view,
so we can go from panoramic vision,
see the entire scene that we
are in by dilating our gaze,
talked a lot about this on
this podcast and elsewhere.
We can, for instance, keep
our head and eyes stationary
or mostly stationary, you don't
have to be rigid about it,
and you can expand your field of view
so you can see the walls
and ceiling and floor,
can see yourself in the
environment, that's panoramic view.
It's what you would accomplish
without having to try at all
if you went to a horizon, for instance,
or we can contract our field of view,
I can bring my focus to
a particular location,
what we call a vergence point,
directly in front of me.
Now I'm pointing at the camera
We can do that, we can expand and contract
our visual field of view.
Well, we can expand and contract
our auditory field of view,
so to speak, our auditory window.
You can try this next time
you are in an environment
that's rich with noise, meaning
lots of different sounds.
You can just tune out all the
noise to a background chatter.
You try not focus on
any one particular sound
and you get the background
chatter of noise.
And you'll find that it's
actually very relaxing
in comparison to trying
to listen to somebody
at a cocktail party or
shouting back and forth.
Now, if you're very, very
interested in that person,
or getting to know them better
or what they're telling you,
or some combination of those things,
then you'll be very motivated to do it
but nonetheless, it requires energy
and effort and attention.
How do we do this?
Well, it's actually quite simple
or, at least, it's simple, in essence,
although the underlying
mechanisms are complex.
Here, I have to credit the laboratory
of a guy named Mike Wehr, W-E-H-R,
up at the University of
Oregon who essentially
figured out that we are able to accomplish
this extraction of particular sounds.
We can really hear one person
or a small number of people
amidst a huge background of chatter
because we pay attention
to the onset of words,
but also to the offset of words.
Now, the way to visualize this
is if the background noise
is just like a bunch of waves of noise,
it's literally just sound
waves coming every frequency,
low frequency, high frequency,
glasses clinking together.
If you've got a game, people are shouting,
people are talking on their phone,
there's the crack of the ball,
if somebody actually
manages to hit the ball,
the announcer, et cetera,
but whatever we were paying attention to,
we set up a cone of auditory attention,
a tunnel of auditory attention,
where we are listening
although we don't realize
it, we are listening
for the onset and the
offset of those words.
Now this is powerful
for a couple of reasons.
First of all, it's a call
to arms, so to speak,
to disengage your auditory system
when you don't need to
focus your attention
on something particular.
So if you are somebody,
you're coming home from work,
you've had a very long day
and you're trying to make out
a particular conversation
on background noise,
you might consider just not
having that conversation,
just letting your auditory
landscape be very broad,
almost like panoramic vision.
If you're trying to learn how
to extract sound information,
it could be notes of music,
it could be scales of music,
it could be words spoken by somebody else,
maybe somebody is telling
you what you need to say
for a particular speech or the information
that you need to learn
for a particular topic,
and they're telling it to you,
deliberately paying
attention both to the onset
and to the offset of those
words can be beneficial
because it is exactly the way
that the auditory system likes
to bring in information.
So one of the more common phenomenon
that I think we all experience
is you go to a party
or you meet somebody new and you say hi,
I would say, "Hi, I'm Andrew."
And they'd say, "Hi,
I'm Jeff," for instance.
"Great to meet you."
And then a minute later, I
can't remember the guy's name.
Now, is it because I don't
care what his name is?
No, somehow the presence
of other auditory information interfered.
It's not that my mind was
necessarily someplace else.
It's that the signal-to-noise
as we say wasn't high enough.
Somehow the way he said it or
the way it landed on my ears,
which is really all that matters,
when it comes down to
learning, is such that
it just didn't achieve high
enough signal-to-noise.
The noise was too high
or the signal was too low
or some combination of those.
So the next time you ask somebody's name,
remember listen to the
onset of what they say
and the offset.
So it would be paying
attention to the j in Jeff
and it would be paying
attention to that in f in F,
in Jeff, excuse me.
And chances are, you'll be
able to remember that name.
Now, I don't know if people
who are super learners
of names do this naturally or not.
I don't have access to their brains.
I don't think they're
going to give me access
to their brains either.
But it's a very interesting
way to take the natural biology
of auditory attention and
learning and apply it to scenarios
where you're trying to
remember either people's names
or specific information.
Now, I do acknowledge that
trying to learn every word
in a sentence by paying attention
to its onset and offset
could actually be disruptive
to the learning process.
So this would be more
for specific attention,
like you're asking directions
in a city and somebody says,
okay, you say you're
lost and they say, okay,
you're going to go two blocks down,
you're going to turn left.
And then you're going to see
a landmark on your right.
And then you're going to go in
the third door on your left.
That's a lot of information,
at least, for me.
So the way you would
want to listen to that
is you're going to go down the road.
See, I already forgot.
You're going to go left and
you're just going to program
and instead of just hearing the word left,
you're going to think the L at
the front of left and the T.
You're going to left, okay.
So you're coding in specific words.
And what this does is this hijacks
these naturally-occurring
attention mechanisms
that the auditory system likes to use.
So a little bit of data
that for auditory encoding,
this kind of thing can be beneficial.
There are a lot of data that attention
for auditory coding is beneficial.
There are a little bit of data showing
that deliberately encoding
auditory information this way,
meaning trying to learn
auditory information this way
can be beneficial or
can accelerate learning.
And some of these features
of what I'm describing here,
map onto some of the work that
of Mike Merzenich and others
that have been designed
to try and overcome things
like stutter and to treat various forms
of auditory learning disorders.
But more importantly,
and perhaps more powerful
is the work of Mike
Merzenich that was done
with his then graduate
student, Gregg Recanzone
that showed that, using
the attentional system,
we can actually learn much faster
and we can actually
activate neuroplasticity
in the adult brain, something
that's very challenging to do.
And that the auditory system
is one of the main ways
in which we can access
neuroplasticity more broadly.
So I just want to take a couple of minutes
and describe the work of
Recanzone and Merzenich,
because it's absolutely
fantastic and fascinating.
What they did is they had subjects try
to learn auditory information,
except that they told
them to pay attention
to particular frequencies.
So now you know what frequencies are
so, essentially, high-pitched
sounds or low-pitched sounds.
What they found was
just passively listening
to a bunch of stuff does not
allow the brain to change
and for that stuff to
be remembered at all.
That's not a surprise.
We've all experienced the phenomenon
of having someone talk and
we see their mouth moving
and we're like, yeah,
this is really important,
this is really important.
We're listening. We're trying to listen.
And then they walk away and we think
I didn't get any of that.
And you wonder whether or not it was them,
maybe this is happening to you right now.
You wonder whether or not it was you,
you wonder whether or not you
have trouble with learning
or you have attention deficit.
It could be any number
of different things.
But what Recanzone and
Merzenich discovered
was that if you instruct
subjects to listen
for particular cues within
speech, or within sounds,
that not only can you learn
those things more quickly,
but that you can remap these
tonotopic maps in the cortex
that I referred to earlier.
You actually get changes
in the neural architecture,
the neural circuitry in the brain,
and this can occur not only very rapidly,
but they can occur in the adult brain,
which prior to their work was not thought
to be amenable to change.
It was long thought that neuroplasticity
could only occur in the developing brain,
but the work of Recanzone and Merzenich
in the auditory system
actually was some of the first
that really opened up
everybody's eyes and ears
to the idea that the brain
can change in adulthood.
So here's how this sort
of process would work
and how you might apply it.
If you are trying to learn music,
or you're trying to learn information
that you're going to then recite,
you can decide to highlight certain words
or certain frequencies of sound
or certain scales or
certain keys on the piano,
and to only focus on those
for certain learning bouts.
So I'll give an example
that's real time for me,
meaning it's happening right now.
I know generally what I want
to say when I arrive here,
I even know specifically certain things
that I want to make
sure get across to you,
but I don't think about every single word
that I'm going to say
and the precise order
in which I'm going to say those things.
That would be actually very disruptive
because it wouldn't match
my normal patterns of speech
and you'd probably think I
was sounding rather robotic
if I were to do that.
So one way that we can
remember information
is as we write out, for instance,
something that we want to say,
we can highlight particular
words, we can underline those.
If we're listening to somebody
and they're telling us information,
we can decide just to
highlight particular words
that they said to us and write those down.
Now, of course, we're listening
to all the information,
but the work of Recanzone and Merzenich
and the work of others in
addition to his former student
or former post-doc, I don't know which,
Michael Kilgard who's now
got his own lab down in Texas
or others have shown that
the cuing of attention
to particular features of speech,
particular components of speech,
the way in which it increases
our level of attention overall
allows us to capture more
of the information overall.
And so I don't want this
to be abstract at all.
What this means is when you're listening,
you don't have to listen to every word.
You're already listening to every word.
All the information is
coming in through your ears.
What you're trying to
extract is particular things
or themes within the content.
So maybe you decide if
you're listening to me
that you're only going to
listen to the word tools,
or you're only going to listen
to when my voice goes above background,
you get to decide what you
decide to listen to or not.
And what you decide to
focus on isn't necessarily
as important as the fact
that you're focusing.
So I hope that's clear.
The auditory system does this all the time
with the cocktail party effect.
What I'm talking about is
exporting certain elements
of the mechanisms of the
cocktail party effect,
paying attention to the
onset and offset of words
or particular notes within
music or particular scales,
or you can make it even
broader and particular motifs
of music or particular sentences of words
or particular phrases.
And in doing that, you extract more
of the information overall,
even though you're not paying attention
to all the information at once.
Now, I'd like to talk about a phenomenon
that you've all experienced
before, which is called Doppler.
So the Doppler effect is the
way that we experience sound
when the thing that's
making that sound is moving.
The simplest way to explain
this is to translate the sound
into the visual world once again.
So if you've ever seen a
duck or a goose sitting
in a pond or a lake and
it's bobbing up and down,
what you'll notice is
that the ripples of water
that extend out from that duck or goose
are fairly regularly
spaced in all directions.
And that's because that
duck or goose is stationary.
It's moving up and down,
but it's not moving forward
or backward or to the side.
Now, if that duck or
goose were to swim forward
by paddling its little webbed
feet under the surface,
you would immediately notice
that the ripples of water
that are close to and in
front of that duck or goose
would be closer together than
the ones that trailed it,
that were behind.
And that is essentially what
happens with sound as well.
With the Doppler effect,
we experience sounds
that are closer to us at higher frequency,
the ripples are closer together,
and sounds that are further
away at lower frequency,
especially when they're moving past us.
So if you've ever, for
instance, heard a siren
in the distance, [humming]
that's essentially my
rendition of a siren,
I don't know what ambulance
or police or what,
passing you on a street,
that is the Doppler effect.
The Doppler effect is one of the main ways
that we make out the direction
that things are arriving
from and their speeds and trajectories.
And we get very good,
from a very young age,
at discerning what direction
things are arriving from
and the direction that they
are going to pass us in.
And the Doppler effect has probably saved
your life many, many times.
In this way, you just don't realize it
because you'll step off the curb
or you're driving your car
and you pull to the side
so that the ambulance
or firetruck can go by
because you heard that
siren off in the distance,
and then you pull away from the curb
and you get back on the road in part,
because you don't see it any longer,
but also you don't hear any
other sirens in the distance.
Now, some animals such as
bats are exquisitely good
at navigating their
environments according to sound.
Now, we've all heard that bats don't see.
That's actually not true.
They actually have vision,
but they just rely more heavily
on their auditory system.
And the way that bats navigate in the dark
and the way that bats navigate using sound
is through Doppler.
Now, they don't simply listen
to whether or not things
are coming at them or
moving away from them
and pay attention to the
Doppler like the siren example
I gave for you.
What they do is they
generate their own sounds.
So a bat, as it flies around
is sending out clicks,
[Andrew clicks tongue]
I think that's my best
bat sound or maybe it's
[Andrew clicks tongue]
and they're clicking, they're
actually propelling sound out
at a particular frequency that they know.
Now, whether or not they're
conscious of it, I don't know.
I've never asked them.
And if I did ask them, I
don't think they could answer.
And if they could answer,
they couldn't answer
in a language that I could understand.
But the bat is essentially flying around,
sending out sound waves,
pinging its environment
with sound waves of a particular frequency
and then depending on the
frequency of sound waves
that come back, they know
if they're getting closer
to an object or further away from it.
So if they send out
sounds at a frequency of,
this was much slower than
it would actually occur,
but let's say one every
half second, [whining]
and it's coming back even faster [roars]
then they know they're getting closer
because of the Doppler effect.
And if it comes back more slowly,
they know that there's
nothing in front of them.
So the bat is essentially
navigating its world
by creating these auras of sound
that bounce back on to them
from the various objects,
trees, et cetera,
buildings and people, it's
kind of eerie to think about.
But yes, they see you, they
experience you with their sound,
they sense you and they're
using Doppler to accomplish it.
Now I'd like to talk
about ringing in the ears.
This is something that
I get asked about a lot.
And speaking of signal-to-noise,
I don't know if I get
asked about it a lot,
because many people suffer
from ringing in their ears,
or because the people
who suffer from ringing
in their ears suffer so much
that they are more prone to ask.
So it could be a sampling
bias, I don't know,
but I've been asked enough times
and some of the experiences
of discomfort that people have expressed
about having this ringing of the ears
really motivated me to go
deep into this literature.
So the ringing of the
ears that one experiences
is called tinnitus, not
ti-nahy-tus, but tinnitus.
And tinnitus can vary in intensity
and it can vary according
to stress levels,
it can vary across the
lifespan or even time of day.
So it's very subject to background effects
and contextual effects.
So I think we all know
that we should do our best
to maximize healthy sleep.
We did a number of episodes on that.
Essentially, the first four episodes
of the Huberman Lab Podcast
were all about sleep
and how to get better sleep.
We all know that we should
try and limit our stress.
And we had an episode about stress
and ways to mitigate stress as well.
However, there are people, it seems,
that are suffering from tinnitus,
for which stress or lack of sleep
just can't explain the
presence of the tinnitus.
Tinnitus can be caused by disruption
to these hair cells that
we talked about earlier
or damage to the hair cells.
So that's another reason why,
even if you have good hearing now
that you want to protect that hearing
and really avoid putting yourself
into these two-hit environments,
environments where there's
a lot of background noise,
and then you add another
really loud auditory stimulus.
This also can happen at different
times, I should mention.
If you go to a concert or
you listen to loud music
with your headphones and
then you go to a concert,
or you go into a very
loud work environment,
the hair cells can still be vulnerable.
And once those hair cells
are knocked out, currently,
we don't have the
technology to put them back.
Although many groups,
including some excellent groups
at Stanford and elsewhere, too, of course,
are working on ways to
replenish those hair cells
and restore hearing.
There are treatments for tinnitus
that involve taking certain substances.
There are medications for tinnitus.
In the non-prescription landscape,
which is typically what we
discuss on this podcast,
when we discuss taking anything,
there are, essentially, four compounds
for which there are
quality peer-reviewed data,
where there does not appear to
be any overt commercial bias,
meaning that nothing's
reported in the papers
as funding from a particular company
and those are melatonin, Ginkgo
bilboa, zinc and magnesium.
Now I've talked about melatonin before.
I'm personally not a fan of
melatonin as a sleep aid,
but there are four studies,
first one entitled:
The Effects of Melatonin on Tinnitus,
tinnitus, excuse me, and Sleep.
Second one, Treatment of Central
and Sensory Neural Tinnitus
with orally-administered melatonin.
And then the title goes on much longer,
but it's a randomized study.
I'm not going to read out all these.
Melatonin: Can it Stop The ringing?
which is an interesting
article, double-blinded study,
and The Effects of Melatonin on Tinnitus.
Each one of these studies
has anywhere from 30
to more than 100 subjects,
in one case 102 subjects;
both genders as they list them out,
typically, it's listed as
sex, not gender in studies
so it should say both
sexes, but nonetheless;
an age range anywhere from 30 years old,
all the way up to 65 plus.
I didn't see any studies
of people younger than 30.
All three focused on
melatonin, not surprisingly,
because of the titles, looking at a range
of dosages anywhere from
three milligrams per day,
which is sort of typical of
many supplements for melatonin,
still much higher than one
would manufacture endogenously
through your own pineal gland,
but three milligrams in these studies
for a duration of anywhere from 30 days
to much longer in some cases, six months.
And all four of these studies found modest
yet still statistically
significant effects
of taking melatonin by mouth,
so it's orally-administered melatonin
in reducing the severity of tinnitus.
So that's compelling, at least to me.
It doesn't sound like a cure.
And, of course, as always,
I'm not a physician,
I'm a scientist, so I
don't prescribe anything.
I only profess things, I
report to you the science.
You have to decide if
melatonin is right for you
if you have tinnitus.
And certainly, I say that
both to protect myself,
but also protect you.
You're responsible for
your health and wellbeing.
And I'm not telling anyone to run out
and start taking melatonin for tinnitus,
but it does seem that
it can have some effects
in reducing its symptoms.
Ginkgo Boaboa is an interesting compound.
It's been prescribed for or recommended
for many, many things, but
there are a few studies,
again, double-blinded studies
lasting one to six months,
one that has have an
impressive number of subjects,
978 subjects ranging from
age 18 all the way up to 65
so on and so forth that show
not huge effects of Ginkgo,
but as they quote,
limited evidence suggests
that if tinnitus is a side
effect of something else,
in particular, cognitive decline,
so age-related tinnitus might
be helped by Ginkgo Boaboa.
I won't go through all the
details of the zinc studies,
but it seems that zinc supplementation
at higher levels than are typical
of most people's intakes
of 50 milligrams per day,
do appear to be able to
reduce subjective symptoms
of tinnitus in most of the people
that took the supplemented zinc.
There aren't a lot of studies on that.
So I could only find one
double-blinded study.
It lasted anywhere from one to six months,
41 subjects, both genders
listed out again here, 45 to 64,
and they saw a decrease in the
severity of tinnitus symptoms
with 50 milligrams of
elemental zinc supplementation.
And then last but not least
is the magnesium study.
Again, only a single study.
It's a Phase II study looking
at a fairly limited number of subjects,
so only 19 subjects taking 532 milligrams
of elemental magnesium.
For those of you that take magnesium,
there's magnesium and elemental magnesium,
and it's always translated on the bottle,
but it was associated with
a lessening of symptoms
related to tinnitus.
So for you tinnitus sufferers out there,
you may already be aware of this,
you may already be taking these things
and had no positive effects,
meaning they didn't help, maybe not.
I hope that you'll, at
least, consider these,
talk to your doctor about them.
I do realize that tinnitus
is extremely disruptive.
I can't say I empathize because I don't,
from a place of experience, that is,
because I don't have tinnitus,
but for those of you that
don't include myself,
you can imagine that
hearing sounds of things
that aren't there and
the ringing in one's ears
can be very disruptive and I
think would be very disruptive
and explains why people with
tinnitus reach out so often
with questions about
how to alleviate that.
And I hope this information
was useful to you.
I'd like to now talk about
balance and our sense of balance,
which is controlled by, believe it or not,
our ears and things in our ears,
as well as by our brain and
elements of our spinal cord.
But before I do that, I want
to ask you another question
or I would rather, I'd like
to ask you to ask yourself
a question and answer it,
which is how big are your ears.
It turns out that the
ears grow our entire life.
In the early stage of our
life, they grow more slowly.
And then as we age,
they grow more quickly.
You may have noticed if
you have family members
who are well into their 70s and 80s,
and if you're fortunate, into their 90s
and maybe even 100s, is that the ears
of some of these individuals
get very, very big,
relative to their previous ear sizes.
So it turns out that biological age
can actually be measured
according to ear size.
Now you have to take a few
measurements but there's,
believe it or not, there is a formula
in the scientific literature,
if you know your ear circumference,
so the distance around
your ear, ears, plural,
presumably you have two, most people do,
in millimeters, so you're
going to take the circumference
of your ears in millimeters.
How would you do this?
Maybe you take a string and
you put it around your ear,
and then you measure the string.
That's probably going to be
easier than marching around
your ear or somebody
else's ear with a ruler
and measuring in millimeters.
So what's your ear
circumference, on the outside,
don't go in on the divot or anything.
You're just going around
as if you're going to trace
the closest fitting oval,
assuming your ears are
oval, closest fitting oval
that matches your ear circumference.
Take that number in
millimeters, subtract from it...
Oh, excuse me, I should do this correctly.
Do that for both ears, add them together,
add those numbers together, divide by two,
get the average for your two ears,
get your average ear circumference,
of course, your two ears.
Then take that number in millimeters,
subtract 88.1 and then
whatever value that is,
multiply it times 1.96
and that will tell you
your biological age.
Now why in the world
would this be accurate?
As we age, there are changes in number
of different biological pathways.
One of those pathways
is the pathways related
to collagen synthesis.
So not only are our ears growing,
but our noses are growing too,
and my nose seems to be growing a lot.
But then again, I did
sports where I would get
my nose broken, something
I don't recommend.
As I always point out, you don't get
a nose like mine doing
yoga, but nonetheless,
my nose is still growing and
my ears are still growing.
And I suspect as I get older,
if I have the good fortune of
living into my 80s and 90s,
my ears are going to continue to grow.
A comparison between chronological
age and biological age
is something that's a really
deep interest these days
in the work of David Sinclair
at Harvard Medical School and others.
So called Horvath clocks
that people have developed
have tapped into how the
epigenome and the genome
can give us some insight
into our biological age
and how that compares to
our chronological age.
Most of us know our chronological age,
because we know when we were born
and we know where we are
relative to that now.
But you can start to make a little chart,
if you like, about your
rates of ear growth.
Your rates of ear growth
actually correlate pretty well
with your rates of biological progression
through this thing that we call life.
So it's not something that
we think about too often,
but just like our DNA and our epigenome,
and some other markers of metabolic health
and hormone health relate to our age,
so does our collagen synthesis.
And one of the places
that shows up the most
is in these two little goodies
on the sides of our heads,
which are our ears.
So even though it's a little
bit of a bizarre metric,
it makes perfect sense in
the biological context.
So let's talk about balance
and how to get better at balancing.
The reason why we're talking about balance
and how to get better at balancing
in the episode about hearing
is that all the goodies
that are going to allow you
to do that are in your ears.
They're also in your brain, but
they're mostly in your ears.
So as you recall from the
beginning of this episode,
you have two cochlea, cochleas,
that are one on each side of your head.
And that's a little
spiral snail-shaped thing
that converts sound waves
into electrical signals
that the rest of your
brain can understand.
Right next to those,
you have what are called
semicircular canals.
The semicircular canals
can be best visualized
as thinking about three hula
hoops with marbles in them.
So imagine that you have a hula hoop
and it's not filled with
marbles all the way around,
it's just got some marbles
down there at the base.
So if you were to move
that hula hoop around,
the marbles would move around, [shushing].
You've got three of those and
each one of those hula hoops
has these marbles that can move around.
One of those hula hoops
is positioned vertically
with respect to gravity.
So it's basically parallel to your nose.
It sits like this, if
you're watching on a video,
but basically it's upright.
Another one of those
hula hoops is basically
at a 90-degree angle to your nose.
It's basically parallel to the floor
if you're standing up right
now, if you're seated.
And the other one, it's kind of tilted
about 45 degrees in between those.
Now why is the system there?
Well, those marbles within
each one of those hula hoops
can move around, but
they'll only move around
if your head moves in a particular way,
and there are three planes or three ways
that your head can move.
Your head can move up and down
like I'm nodding right now.
So that's called pitch,
it's pitching forward or pitching back.
So it's a nod, up and down,
or I can shake my head no, side to side.
That's called a yaw.
You pilots will be very
familiar with this, yaw.
Not yawn, yaw.
And then there's roll, tilting
the head from side to side,
the way that a cute
puppy might look at you
from side to side or that if somebody
doesn't really understand or
believe what you're saying,
they might tilt their head,
very common phenomenon.
I mean, nobody does that to me,
but they do that to each other.
So pitch, yaw and roll are
the movements of the head
in each of the three major
planes of motion, as we say.
And each one of those causes those marbles
to move in one or two of
the various hula hoops.
So if I move my head
up and down when I nod,
one of those hula hoops,
literally, right now,
the marbles are moving back and forth.
They aren't actually marbles by the way,
these are little, kind of
like little stones, basically,
little calcium-like deposits
and when they roll back and forth,
they deflect little hairs,
little hair cells that
aren't like the hair cells
that we use for measuring sound waves.
They're not too different, but
they are different from them,
not like the hairs on our heads,
but they're basically rolling past
these little hair cells
and causing them to deflect
and when they deflect
downward, the neurons,
because hair cells are neurons,
send information up to the brain.
So if I move my head like this,
there's a physical movement
of these little stones
in this hula hoop as I'm referring to it,
but they deflect these
hairs, send those hairs,
which are neurons, those hair cells,
send information off to the brain.
If I move my head from side to side,
different little stones move.
If I roll my head, different stones move.
This is an exquisite system
that exists in all animals
that have a jaw.
So any fish that has
a jaw has this system,
a puppy has the system,
any animal that has a jaw has
this so-called balance system,
which we call the vestibular system.
One of the more important things to know
about the vestibular, the balance system
is that it works together
with the visual system.
Let's say I hear something off to my left
and I swing my head over to
the left to see what it is.
There are two sources of
information about where my head is
relative to my body and
I need to know that.
First of all, when I quickly
move my head to the side,
those little stones, as
I'm referring to them,
I realize they're not actually stones,
but as I'm referring to them,
they quickly, whoom,
activate those hair cells
in that one semicircular canal,
and send a signal off to my brain
that my head just moved
to the side like this,
not that it went like
this and pitched back
or not that it tilted, but
it just moved to the side.
But also visual information
slid past my field of view.
I didn't have to think about it,
but just slid past my field of view.
And when those two signals combine,
my eyes then lock to
a particular location.
Now, if this is at all complicated,
you can actually uncouple these things.
It's very easy to do. You
can do this right now.
In fact, I'd like you
to do this experiment
if you're not already doing something else
that requires your attention.
And certainly, don't do
this if you're driving.
You're going to sit down and
you're going to move your head
to the left very slowly
with your eyes open.
So you're going to move
it very, very slowly.
The whole thing should
take about five, six,
maybe even 10 seconds to complete.
Okay, I just did it.
Now, I'm going to do it very quickly.
I'd like you to do it
very quickly as well.
Now do it slowly again.
What you probably noticed
is that it's very
uncomfortable to do it slowly,
but you can do it very quickly
without much discomfort at all.
You just move your head to the side.
The reason is when you move
your head, very slowly,
those little stones at the
base of that hula hoop,
they don't get enough momentum to move.
So you're actually not
generating this signal
to the brain that your head is moving.
And what you'll notice is
that your eyes have to go,
boom, boom, boom, jumping
over step-by-step.
Whereas if you move your
head really quickly,
the signal gets off to
your brain and your eyes
just go boom, right to the
location you want to look at.
So moving your body slowly
is actually very disruptive
to the vestibular system.
And it's very disruptive
to your visual system.
Now, if you've ever had the misfortune
of being on a boat and you're
going through big oscillations
on the boat, for those of you seasick,
folks that get seasick,
this can actually make
certain people seasick
just to hear about it,
those big oscillations
going up and down and up and down.
Those are very disruptive.
We'll talk about nausea in a minute
and how to offset that kind of nausea.
I get pretty seasick, but there are ways
that you can deal with
this but this is incredible
because what it means is
a purely physical system
of these little stones
rolling around in there
and directing where your eyes should go.
So you can do this also
just by looking up.
So let's just say, you're
sitting in a chair,
you're going to look
up towards the ceiling
and your eyes will just go there.
You're doing this eyes
open and you look down.
Now try doing it right
really, really slowly.
Some people even get
motion sick doing this,
which if you do, then just stop.
Okay, so you can do this also to the side,
although it works best if
you're moving your head
from side to side and
we're nodding up and down.
So what we're doing
here is we're uncoupling
these two mechanisms,
we're pulling them apart,
the visual part and the vestibular part,
just to illustrate to you that, normally,
these mechanisms in your
inner ear tell your eyes
where to go, but as well,
your eyes tell your balance
system, your vestibular system,
how to function.
So I'd like you to do
a different experiment.
I'm not going to do it right
now, but basically stand up.
If you get the opportunity,
you can do this safely,
wherever you are, you're going to stand up
and you're going to look
forward about 10, 12 feet.
Pick a point on a wall or you can,
anywhere that you like,
if you're out in public,
just do it anyway.
Just tell them you're listening
to Huberman Lab Podcasts,
and someone's telling you to do it.
Anyway, if you don't want
to do it, don't do it.
But, basically, do it.
Stand on one leg and
lift up the other leg.
You can bend your knee, if you like
and just look off into the
distance about 10, 12 feet.
If you can do that, if
you can stand on one leg,
now close your eyes,
chances are you're going
to suddenly feel what
scientists call postural sway.
You're going to start
swaying around a lot.
It is very hard to balance
with your eyes closed.
And if you think about that,
it's like, why is that?
That's crazy.
Why would it be that it's hard to balance
with your eyes closed?
Well, information about the
visual world also feeds back
onto this vestibular system.
So the vestibular system
informs your vision
and tells you where to move your eyes
and your eyes and their positioning tell
your balance system,
your vestibular system
how it should function.
So there's a really cool way
that you can learn to optimize balance.
You're not going to try
and do this by learning
to balance with your eyes closed.
What you can do is you can raise one leg
and you can look at a short distance,
maybe off to just the distance
that your thumb would be
if you were to reach your
arm out in front of you.
Although you don't necessarily have to put
your thumb in front of you.
So maybe just about two
feet in front of you.
Then while still balancing,
you're going to step your
vision out a further distance,
and then a further distance
and as far as you can possibly see
in the environment that you're in.
And then you're going
to march it back to you.
Now, what the literature shows
is that this kind of balance training
where you incorporate the
visual system and extending out,
and then marching back in the point
at which you direct your visual focus,
sends robust information
about the relationship
between your visual world
and your balance system.
And, of course, the
balance system includes
not just these hula hoops,
these semicircular canals,
but they communicate with the cerebellum,
the so-called mini-brain,
it actually means mini-brain
in the back of your brain,
combines that with visual information
and your map of the body surface.
That pattern of training
is very beneficial
for enhancing your ability to balance
because the ability to balance
is, in part, the activation of
particular postural muscles,
but just as much, perhaps even moreso,
it's about being able to
adjust those postural muscles,
excuse me, it's about the ability
to adjust those postural muscles
as you experience changes
in your visual world.
And one of the most robust ways
that you can engage changes
in your visual world
is through your own movement.
And so most people are not trying
to balance in place, right?
They're not just trying to stand there
like a statue on one leg.
Most of what we think about
when we think about balance
is for sake of sport or dynamic balance
of being able to break ourselves,
when we're lunging in
one particular direction
to stop ourselves, that is,
and then to move in another direction
or for skateboarding or surfing or cycling
or any number of different
things, gymnastics.
So the visual system is the primary input
by which you develop balance,
but you can't do it just
with the visual system.
So what I'm recommending
is if you're interested
in cultivating a sense of balance,
understand the relationship
between the semicircular canals,
understand that they are
both driving eye movements
and they are driven by eye movements.
It's a reciprocal relationship.
And then even just two
or three minutes a day,
or every once in a while,
even three times a week,
maybe five minutes, maybe
10 minutes, you pick,
but if you want to enhance balance,
you have to combine changes
in your visual environment
with a static posture, standing on one leg
and shifting your visual
environment or static visual view,
looking at one thing and
changing your body posture.
So those two things,
we now know from the
scientific literature,
combine in order to give an
enhanced sense of balance.
And there's a really nice paper
that was published in 2015
called Effects of Balance
Training on Balance Performance.
This was in healthy adults.
It's a systematic review
and a meta analysis.
A meta analysis is when you combine
a lot of literature from
a lot of different papers
and extract the really robust
and the less robust statistical effects.
So it's a really nice paper as well.
There are some papers
out there, for instance,
comparison of static balance
and the role of vision
in the elite athletes.
This is essentially the paper
that I've extracted
most of the information
that I just gave you from.
And that paper, and there
are some others as well,
but basically I distilled them down
into their core components.
The core components are
move your vision around
while staying static, still
but in a balanced position
like standing on one leg,
could be something more complicated
if you're somebody who can do
more complicated movements.
Unilateral movement
seemed to be important,
so standing on one leg as opposed to both,
or trying to generate
some tilt is another way
to go about it or imbalance,
meaning one limb
asymmetrically being activated
compared to the other limb.
And then the other way to encourage
or to cultivate and build
up this vestibular system
and your sense of balance
actually involves movement itself,
acceleration.
So that's what we're
going to talk about now.
So up until now, I've
been talking about balance
only in the static sense,
like standing on one leg for instance,
but that's a very artificial situation.
Even though you can
train balance that way,
most people who want to
enhance their sense of balance
for sport or dance, or
some other endeavor,
want to engage balance in a dynamic way,
meaning moving through lots of
different planes of movement,
maybe even sometimes
while squatting down low
or jumping and landing
or making trajectories
that are different angles.
For that, we need to consider
that the vestibular system
also cares about acceleration.
So it cares about head position,
it cares about eye position
and where the eyes are
and where you're looking,
but it also cares
about what direction
you're moving and how fast.
And one of the best things that you can do
to enhance your sense of balance
is to start to bring
together your visual system,
the semicircular canals of the inner ear
and what we call linear acceleration.
So if I move forward in
space rigidly upright,
it's a vastly different situation
than if I'm leaning to the side.
One of the best ways to cultivate
a better sense of balance, literally,
within the sense organs and the neurons
and the biology of the
brain is to get into modes
where we are accelerating
forward, typically,
it's forward while also tilted
with respect to gravity.
Now this would be the
carve on a skateboard
or on a surf board or a snowboard.
This would be the taking
a corner on a bike
while being able to
lean, safely, of course,
lean into the turn so that your head
is actually tilted with
respect to the earth.
So anytime that we are rigidly upright,
we aren't really exercising the
vestibular system imbalance.
And this is why you see people in the gym
on these, one of those bouncy balls,
Bocce balls are the one that
the guys roll in the park.
Bouncy balls, where they're
balancing back and forth,
that will work the small
stabilizing muscles.
But what I'm talking about
is getting into modes
where you actually tilt
the body and the head
with respect to earth.
What I mean is with respect
to Earth's gravitational pull.
Now the cerebellum is a
very interesting structure
because not only is it
involved in balance,
but it's also involved in skill-learning
and in generating timing of movements.
It's a fascinating structure deserving
of an entire episode or several
episodes all on its own,
but some of the outputs of the cerebellum,
meaning the neurons in
the cerebellum get inputs,
but they also send information out.
The outputs of the cerebellum
are strongly linked
to areas of the brain that
release neuromodulators
that make us feel really
good, in particular,
serotonin and dopamine.
And this is an early emerging
sub-field within neuroscience,
but a lot of what are
called the non-motor outputs
of the cerebellum have
a profound influence,
not just on our ability to
learn how to balance better,
but also how we feel overall.
So for you exercisers out there,
I do hope people are getting
regular healthy amounts of exercise.
We've talked about what that
means in previous episodes,
so at least 150 minutes
a week of endurance work,
some strength training,
a minimum five sets per body
part to maintain musculature
even if you don't want to grow muscles,
you want to do that in
order to maintain healthy,
strengthened bones, et cetera.
If you're doing that but
you're only doing things
like curls in the gym, squats in the gym,
riding the Peloton, or even
if you're outside running,
and you're getting forward acceleration,
but you're never actually getting tilted,
you're never actually getting tilted
with respect to Earth's
gravitational pull,
you're not really exercising
and getting the most
out of your nervous system.
Activation of the cerebellum in this way
of being tilted or the head being tilted
and the body being tilted
while in acceleration,
typically forward acceleration,
but sometimes side to side has a profound
and positive effect on our
sense of mood and wellbeing.
And as I talked about in previous episode,
it can also enhance our
ability to learn information
in the period after
generating those tilts.
And the acceleration.
And that's because the
cerebellum has these outputs
to these areas of the brain
that release these neuromodulators,
like serotonin and dopamine.
And they make us feel really good.
I think this is one of the
reasons why, growing up,
I had some friends, some
of whom might've been
the world heavyweight
champions of laziness
for essentially everything,
except they would wake up at
4:30 in the morning to go surf.
They would drive, they would
get up so early to go surf.
It's not just surfers and
some surfers, by the way,
I should point out are not lazy humans.
They do a lot of other things.
But I knew people that couldn't
be motivated to do anything,
but they were highly driven
to get into these experiences
of forward acceleration while tilted
with respect to gravity,
likewise, with snowboarding
or skiing or cycling.
Those modes of exercise seem
to have an outsized effect
both on our wellbeing and our ability
to translate the vestibular
balance that we achieve
in those endeavors to
our ability to balance
while doing other things,
and I don't mean psychological
balance necessarily.
I mean physical balance.
So for those of you that
don't think of yourselves
as very coordinated or
with very good balance,
getting into these modes of
acceleration forward movement
or lateral movement while getting tilted,
even if you have to do it
slowly, could be beneficial,
I do believe, and the
scientific literature points
to the fact that it will be beneficial
for cultivating better
sense of physical balance.
It can really build up the circuits
of this vestibular system.
And then, of course,
the feel-good components
of acceleration while tilted
or while getting the head
into different orientations
relative to gravity,
well, that's the explanation
for roller-coasters.
Some people hate roller-coasters.
They make them feel nauseous.
Many people love roller-coasters
and one of the reasons
they love roller-coasters
is because of the way that
when you get the body,
even if you're not
generating the movement,
you get the body into forward acceleration
and you're going upside
down and tilted to the side
as the tracks go from side
to side and tilt, et cetera,
you're getting activation
of these deeper brain nuclei
that trigger the release
of neuromodulators
that just make us feel
really, really good.
In fact, some people get a long arc,
a long duration buzz from having gone
through those experiences.
Some people who hate roller-coasters
are probably getting nauseous,
just hearing about that.
So I encourage people to get
into modes of acceleration
while tilted every once in a while,
provided you can do it safely.
It's an immensely powerful
way to build up your skills
in the realm of balance.
And it's also, for most
people, very, very pleasing.
It feels really good because
of the chemical relationship
between forward acceleration
and head tilt and body tilt.
Now, speaking of feeling nauseous,
some people suffer from vertigo.
Some people feel dizzy,
some people get lightheaded.
An important question
to ask yourself, always,
if you're feeling quote-unquote
dizzy or lightheaded,
is are you dizzy or are you lightheaded?
Now, we're not going to
diagnose anything here
because there's just
no way we can do that.
This is essentially me
shouting into a tunnel.
So we don't know what's going on
with each and every one of you
but if ever you feel that
your world is spinning,
but that you can focus on
your thumb, for instance,
but the rest of the world is spinning
and your thumb is stationary,
that's called being dizzy.
Now, if you feel like you're falling
or that you feel like you need to get down
onto the ground because
you feel light-headed,
that's being light-headed.
And, oftentimes, with
language we don't distinguish
between being dizzy and being lightheaded.
Now there are a lot of ways that dizziness
and lightheadedness can occur.
And I don't even want to
begin to guess at the number
of different things and
ways that it could happen
for those of you that suffer from it
because it could be any number of them.
But, oftentimes, if people
are lightheaded, yes,
it could be low blood sugar.
It could also be that you're dehydrated.
It could also be that you
are low in electrolytes.
We talked about this
in a previous episode,
but we will talk about it
more in a future episode.
Many people have too little
sodium in their system, salt,
and that's why they feel lightheaded.
I have family members who, for years,
thought they had disrupted blood sugar.
They would get shaky,
jittery, lightheaded,
feel like they were nauseous, et cetera.
And simply the addition of little sea salt
to their water remedied
the problem entirely.
I don't think it's going
to remedy every issue
of lightheadedness out
there by any stretch,
but just the addition of
salt, in this particular case,
helped the person.
And they are not alone.
Many people who think that
they have low blood sugar,
actually are lightheaded
because of low electrolytes
and because of the way
that salt carries water
into the system and creates
changes in blood volume,
et cetera.
Low sodium can often be a
source of lightheadedness
as can low blood sugar and, of course,
other things as well.
Now for dizziness or seasickness,
we were all taught that
you need to pick a point
on the horizon and focus on it.
But actually, that's not correct.
It is true that if you are
down in the cabin of a boat
or you're on the lower
deck and all you can see
are things up close to you,
that getting sloshed around, like so
or the boat going up and down, like so,
I think I'm getting a little
seasick, even as I do this
and I describe it,
focusing on things close
to you can be problematic.
And in that case, the
advice to go up on deck
and get fresh air and to
look off into the horizon,
that part is correct.
But focusing your eyes
on a particular location
on the horizon is effectively like trying
to move very slowly as
I had you do before,
where you're trying to
move your head very slowly
while fixating on one location.
Your eyes and your balance
system were designed
to move together.
So really, what you want to
do is allow your visual system
to track with your vestibular system.
This is why sitting in the
back of an Uber or a taxi
and being on your phone
can make you suddenly feel very nauseous.
Sometimes the cabs,
particularly in New York City,
they have a lot of occluders,
they have a lot of stuff
blocking your field of view.
There's usually a little
portal where you can see out
to the front of the front windshield,
but there's all this stuff now,
televisions in the back
seat and you're watching
that television and the cab is moving.
You're in linear acceleration,
and sometimes you're taking
corners, you're braking
so then your vestibular
system has to adjust to that.
If you're looking at your phone or a book,
or even if you're talking
to somebody, actually,
I'm starting to feel a little nauseous
just talking about it.
I promise I'm not going
to finish this episode
by vomiting at the end, at least not here,
but what can happen is
that you're uncoupling
the visual information from your motion,
from your vestibular information.
You want those to be coupled.
This is why a lot of people have to drive,
they can't be in the passenger seat.
Because when you drive,
you also get what's called
proprioceptive feedback.
Your body is sending signals
also to the vestibular system
about where you are in space.
When you're the passenger,
you're just getting jolted
around as the person is driving.
And if you're looking at
your phone, it's even worse.
And if you're looking at the occluder
between you and the two front
seats, that's even worse.
So this is why staring out
the front windshield is great
but you don't want to fixate.
So, hopefully, I spared a
few people and, hopefully,
a few cab drivers of
having people get sick
in their cars or Ubers.
Let your visual system
and your vestibular system work together.
If appropriate, get into
linear acceleration,
and you'll improve your sense of balance.
Once again, we've covered
a tremendous amount of information.
Now, you know how you hear,
how you make sense of the
sounds in your environment,
how those come into your ears
and how your brain processes them.
In addition, we talked about things
like low level white noise
and even binaural beats,
which can be used to enhance
certain brain states,
certain rhythms within the brain,
and even dopamine release in ways
that allow you to learn better.
And we talked about the balance system
and this incredible relationship
between your vestibular apparatus,
meaning the portions of your inner ear
that are responsible for balance
and your visual system and gravity.
And you can use those to
enhance your learning as well,
as well as just to enhance
your sense of balance.
If you're learning from this podcast,
please subscribe on YouTube,
that really helps us.
In addition, please leave us any comments
or feedback or suggestions
for future episode content
on YouTube in the comment section.
If you haven't already
subscribed on Apple and Spotify,
please do that as well.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review.
At Apple, you can also leave
us comments and feedback.
During this episode, I
mentioned some supplements.
We partnered with Thorne because Thorne
has the very highest levels of stringency
with respect to the quality
of their ingredients
and accuracy about the amounts
of those ingredients contained
within their products.
If you'd like to see the
products that I take from Thorne,
you can go to T-H-O-R-N-E
dot com, slash the letter U
slash Huberman.
So that's thorne.com/u/huberman
to see all the supplements
that I take.
And if you do that, you can get 20% off
any of those supplements or
20% off any of the supplements
that Thorne makes.
For those of you that might want
to support us in other ways,
we have a Patreon account.
It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman,
and there you can support our podcast
at any level that you like.
In addition, if you'd like
to support the podcast,
please check out our sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of the episode.
That is absolutely the
best way to support us.
Last but not least, I'd like to thank you
for your time and attention and desire
and willingness to learn
about vision and balance.
And, of course, thank you
for your interest in science.
[tranquil music]